---
title: "OSL Internship Program Guideline"
description: "Internship Program Guideline"
date: "2023-10-30"
authors: ["OSL Team"]
template: single-sidebar.html
---

# Open Science Labs Intern/Apprentice Guide

Welcome to the Open Science Labs Internship/Apprenticeship Program Guide. This
comprehensive document is your gateway to engaging with a network of
professionals and peers dedicated to the advancement of open science and open
source. Whether you're considering applying to our program or you've already
been accepted, this guide is designed to facilitate a smooth transition into our
collaborative environment. You'll find detailed instructions on how to apply,
connect with mentoring organizations, and make the most of your internship once
you're on board. It's more than just an internship—it's a chance to contribute
to a global movement and develop skills that will serve you throughout your
career. Let's embark on this exciting journey together.

## Part I: Prospective Candidates

Embarking on the journey to become an intern or apprentice with Open Science
Labs is a step towards significant personal and professional development. This
part of the guide is tailored to assist you in navigating the application
process seamlessly. It provides insights on how to identify and select a project
that resonates with your passion, how to engage with mentors proactively, and
how to make preliminary contributions that will set you apart. Let's get started
on a path that leads to growth and exciting opportunities in open science and
technology.

### 1. How to Apply

#### 1.1. Choosing a Mentoring Organization and Project

Begin by exploring the list of available mentoring organizations and their
projects. Look for one that aligns with your interests and skills.

#### 1.2. Initiating Contact with Projects and Mentors

Reach out to the project mentors via the contact information provided. Introduce
yourself, express your interest, and ask any initial questions you may have
about the project or the mentoring process.

#### 1.3. Making a Small Contribution

Demonstrate your commitment by making a small contribution to the project. This
could be fixing a minor bug, improving documentation, or any other task as
suggested by the mentor.

#### 1.4. Crafting a Proposal with Mentor Support

With your mentor's guidance, develop a detailed proposal outlining what you aim
to achieve during the internship. This should include specific milestones, a
timeline, and how your work will contribute to the project's goals.

**Note on Mentor Evaluation**: Mentors will assess if candidates possess the
basic requirements to contribute effectively to the project. Transparent
feedback will be provided, allowing candidates to shift to another project if
necessary to ensure a suitable fit.

## Part II: Approved Interns/Apprentices

Congratulations on being selected as an intern or apprentice! This part of the
guide will serve as a roadmap to your success in the Open Science Labs program.
It outlines the expectations for your collaboration with mentors, the importance
of communication, and the coding standards you should follow. You will find tips
on how to maintain an effective workflow, stay proactive, and ensure that your
contribution leaves a lasting impact. Welcome to the team — your proactive
journey starts here.

### Effective Workflow and Proactivity

Once accepted, establish a regular workflow with your mentor. Be proactive: seek
out tasks, ask questions, and push beyond the basics. Set up frequent check-ins
and be clear about what you aim to accomplish each week.

### Communication Best Practices

Clear and timely communication is essential. Keep your mentor updated on your
progress, challenges, and any assistance you may require. Use the communication
tools preferred by the project for all discussions.

### Programming Best Practices

Adhere to the programming standards and best practices recommended by your
mentor and the project. Write clean, well-documented, and maintainable code. Be
open to code reviews and feedback, as they are learning opportunities.

By following these guidelines, both candidates and approved interns/apprentices
can maximize their growth, contributions, and overall experience within the Open
Science Labs Internship/Apprenticeship Program.
