---
title: "OSL Internship Program Guideline"
description: "Internship Program Guideline"
date: "2023-12-19"
authors: ["OSL Team"]
template: single-sidebar.html
---

# OSL Internship/Apprenticeship Program Cycle 1: Winter/Spring 2024

We are excited to kick off the first cycle of the Open Science Labs (OSL)
Internship/Apprenticeship Program for 2024! This program offers a unique
opportunity for individuals to join as mentors or as students/collaborators.

The Internship/Apprenticeship Program is a collaborative effort between
[Open Science Labs](https://opensciencelabs.org) and
[The GRAPH Network](https://thegraphnetwork.org), with The GRAPH Network
providing institutional support for the program.

Please note that this internship program is unpaid, meaning there is no
financial compensation for either interns or mentors. Our goal is to facilitate
collaboration on projects and provide students and contributors with valuable
experience in engaging with open source initiatives.

Below you'll find essential information about each role and how to get involved.

## Guidelines for Mentors

To submit a project, you need to be a core contributor or have approval from the
core members of the project. This step is crucial to ensure the success of your
project plan, as support from core members is essential.

In our internship, we refer to a computer program, library, or tool as a
**PROJECT**. The tasks proposed for a project will be known as **PLAN** or
**PROPOSAL PLAN** if it's still in the proposal stage.

You are invited to submit a list of ideas (proposal plans) for one or more
projects you are involved with.

### Project Requirements

The criteria for project proposals are:

- Must be open source.
- Must have a Code of Conduct.
- Should have a clear list of tasks for the intern.
- Requires at least one mentor for guidance.

This format is similar to that of Google Summer of Code.

Each **proposal plan** should clearly define the minimum requirements, such as
programming languages, libraries, and necessary concepts.

### How to Apply

We welcome applications from everyone! You can apply at
[OSL Internship Project Application](https://tinyurl.com/osl-internship-projects-2024-1).

A list of tasks/issues for each **proposal plan** can be organized as a GitHub
epic (an issue with a list of linked issues), a GitHub Milestone, a PDF link, or
similar formats (on GitLab, BitBucket, etc.).

You may propose one or more projects, each with one or more plans.

To get a clearer understanding of structuring a plan for your project, we
recommend reviewing our template available here:
[Project Plan Template](https://opensciencelabs.org/programs/internship/templates/projects-ideas/).

## Guidelines for Students/Collaborators

The Open Science Labs internship is open to all who are interested in
contributing to open source projects.

During the application process, applicants will be referred to as
**candidates**.

Below are the details on eligibility and application instructions.

### Requirements

The primary requirement for applicants is to be at least 18 years old.

Each project will have its own set of criteria that candidates must meet to be
considered for the role.

The minimum weekly commitment for the internship is 20 hours. However,
dedicating more time, if possible, can greatly enhance the experience, providing
deeper insights into the project and its underlying technologies.

The internship cycle typically spans three months. If needed, it may be
extended, subject to mutual agreement between the mentor and the
student/contributor.

### How to Apply

Starting January 5, 2024, the Open Science Labs team will release a list of
available projects. This list will be shared on
[OSL Discord](https://opensciencelabs.org/discord),
[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/company/open-science-labs/), and
[X/Twitter](https://twitter.com/opensciencelabs).

Candidates should review the list of projects and contact the mentor(s) for the
project(s) they are interested in. Mentors will assess the candidate's
suitability based on the project's specific requirements and may assign initial
tasks to gauge the candidate's capabilities.

Once these initial tasks are completed satisfactorily, the mentor will recommend
the candidate to officially apply to the internship program. The application
results will be announced on February 14, 2024.

Please note, the list of participating projects will be available on January
5, 2024. Stay tuned for updates!

## How the Internship Works

### Communication Channels

- **Student/Contributor and Mentor:** Interaction should occur on the platform
  or channel specified by the mentor, such as Discord, Slack, GitHub, WhatsApp,
  email, etc.

- **Open Science Labs with Students/Contributors:** Official communication will
  be through [OSL Discord](https://opensciencelabs.org/discord) in a designated
  group/channel for the specific internship cycle.

- **Open Science Labs with Mentors:** Communication with mentors will be
  conducted via email.

### Blogging Requirement

During the internship, students/collaborators are expected to write blog posts
detailing new features, bug fixes, or improvements made to the project. These
posts should be published on the [OSL Blog](https://opensciencelabs.org/blog/)
and can also be cross-posted to the project's blog.

### Evaluations

The internship includes two major evaluations:

- **Midterm Evaluation:** Mentors assess the progress of their
  students/collaborators.

- **Final Evaluation:** Students/collaborators evaluate their own participation,
  project contributions, and interactions with mentors.

## Timeline

The following is the timeline for the OSL Internship Program Cycle 2024-01:

- **December 1, 2023**: Call for Mentoring Organizations and Projects.
- **January 3, 2024**: Deadline for Mentoring Organizations to apply.
- **January 5, 2024**: Announcement of selected Mentoring Organizations.
- **January 9, 2024**: Call for Interns/Apprentices opens.
- **February 2, 2024**: Deadline for Interns/Apprentices applications.
- **February 9, 2024**: Selection of Interns/Apprentices by mentors.
- **February 14, 2024**: Announcement of approved Interns/Apprentices.
- **February 21-25, 2024**: Integration Phase – interns engage with mentors and
  familiarize themselves with the project.
- **February 26, 2024**: Official Start Date.
- **April 8, 2024**: Mid-term Evaluation.
- **May 20, 2024**: Final Evaluation.
- **May 27-31, 2024**: Interns present their work.
- **June 3, 2024**: Official End Date; Certification process begins.

## Participating Projects

The list of participating projects will be published here on January 4, 2024.
