---
title: Learning
date: 2025-02-02
authors: ["OSL Team"]
---

# Learning at Open Science Labs

Welcome to the Learning section of Open Science Labs, where we are committed to
fostering an environment of continuous education and community engagement. This
section of our website is dedicated to providing resources, organizing study
groups, and hosting events that enhance learning opportunities in the fields of
open science and technology.

## Events

Our **Events** page is your gateway to both past and upcoming events organized
by Open Science Labs. From workshops to seminars and webinars, you can find
information on a variety of gatherings that aim to educate and inspire. Whether
you're looking to attend your first open-source workshop or a seasoned
professional eager to engage with new ideas, our events cater to all levels of
expertise.

Check out our [Events](/learning/events) page for more details on how you can
participate.

## Study Groups

Study Groups at Open Science Labs offer participants a unique opportunity to
learn collaboratively in a supportive environment. Moderated by experienced
members of the community, these groups cover a wide range of topics, from coding
challenges to data science research. Each study group aims to enhance
problem-solving skills and deepen understanding of specific subjects.

Learn more and join a study group by visiting our
[Study Groups](/learning/study-groups) page.

## Resources (Coming Soon)

We are also working on curating a comprehensive list of **Resources** that will
be beneficial for your learning journey. This will include tutorials, course
materials, recommended readings, and more, all accessible through our website.
This new section will support your learning needs by providing trusted,
high-quality educational materials.

Stay tuned for updates on the Resources page, which we will launch soon.

Whether you're looking to deepen your knowledge, share your expertise, or find
new ways to engage with the community, the Learning section of Open Science Labs
is here to support your growth and exploration in open science and technology.
