---
title: "PSF funding open source projects development: SciCookie"
slug: psf-funding-open-source-projects-development-scicookie
date: 2023-09-22
author: Anavelyz Perez, Yurely Camacho
tags: [psf, osl, scicookie, grant, community, collaboration, development]
categories: [open source, software development, python]

draft: false
usePageBundles: true
thumbnail: "/header.svg"
featureImage: "/header.svg"
---


<!-- # PSF funding open source projects development: SciCookie -->
<!-- **By Anavelyz Perez & Yurely Camacho** -->

In this article, we will share our experience in applying for and
executing a Python Software Foundation (PSF) grant on behalf of Open
Science Labs (OSL), submitted between January and February 2023. The
proposal was submitted to contribute to the development and maintenance
of SciCookie, a Python tool within the [OSL incubation
projects](https://opensciencelabs.org/programs/incubator/).

We'll begin by introducing SciCookie, highlighting its key features and
aspects that might interest you. Then, we'll go over the grant
application process and share our reflections on the experience, along
with the lessons we learned.

## What is SciCookie?

As we mentioned at the beginning, SciCookie is a Python tool designed to
provide a Python project template. Its main goals are to simplify the
process of creating your projects and save you a considerable amount of
time because, according to your needs and planning, it gives you a
starting point for the configuration of your project. SciCookie provides
several tools that are as up-to-date as possible and adheres to
community standards.

SciCookie is mainly based on PyOpenSci recommendations regarding the
tools, libraries, best practices and workflows employed by the
significant Python scientific groups. The elements we mention are listed
as options, which means that you can adapt various approaches in your
project, through a text interface (TUI) provided by SciCookie.

SciCookie is available from [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/scicookie/)
and [conda](https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/scicookie). You can also
visit its repository at
[GitHub](https://github.com/osl-incubator/scicookie).

Now that you know a bit about this project, let's tell you about PSF and
how it supports the Python community.

## What is PSF and how does it support the Python community?

The Python Software Foundation (PSF)  is an organization dedicated to
the advancement and improvement of open source technologies. Its mission
is to promote, protect and advance the Python programming language. In
addition, it supports and facilitates the development/growth of the
Python developers community; a diverse and international community.

Among the programs that PSF promotes to achieve its mission, there is a
*Grants Program*, where proposals for projects related to the
development of Python, technologies associated with this programming
language and educational resources, are welcome. Since the creation of
the program, PSF has supported several interesting projects, you can
click [here](https://www.python.org/psf/records/board/resolutions/) to
see the list or have a clearer notion of the proposals, and maybe you
will be encouraged to apply with new projects or ideas.

You should know that the PSF in the grants program evaluates a number of
aspects in each proposal, including the usefulness of the project and
the impact on the Python community. In case you want to know more, we
recommend you visit the space that PSF has on its website for the
[grants program](https://www.python.org/psf/grants/).

So far, we have given you a brief overview of the main aspects of the
two parties involved: SciCookie and PSF. We will continue by telling you
about the grant application, what motivated us, the arranging and
assigning tasks.

## What was the grant application process like?

The PSF grant application process was a long and challenging, but also
very rewarding. It began with careful planning and research. We studied
the needs of the scientific community and found a project that could
help meet those needs. In other words, we build on a strong case for the
grant.

We were studying the different projects within the Open Science Labs
incubation program; where there are a series of approaches and
technologies implemented, including Python projects associated with
DevOps, Data Science, and scientific projects. The option that was best
suited to apply for the grant in our case was SciCookie; because it is a
very useful tool and is focused on helping the Python community.

After completing the planning and research, we began the formal
application process. This included completing an online form and
submitting a detailed proposal. The proposal contains a project
description, timeline, budget and impact section. In our case and in
order to review each aspect carefully, we produced a [file with the
responses](https://github.com/OpenScienceLabs/grant-proposals/blob/96263f736e7f36eb22a3dd1baa16376fd1782e98/psf_proposal.md)
[1] and filled in the budget scheme (template provided by the PSF).  
This process was done under the advice of the OSL Steering Council.

In addition to the above, a series of issues were created and edited in
the project repository, in order to be clear about the activities to be
carried out and the time it would take to develop them in case the
proposal was approved.

Once we had submitted our proposal, we had to wait some months for a
decision. It was a period of great uncertainty, but finally we received
the news that our proposal had been accepted!

## How was the workflow?

With the PSF grant, we were able to start developing and maintaining
SciCookie part-time. We worked with some community developers to add new
features, improve documentation and fix bugs. This included the creation
of a [user
guide](https://github.com/osl-incubator/scicookie/blob/main/docs/guide.md)
to help enthusiasts and developers to use SciCookie.

In terms of task specification, as we described in the previous section,
a series of issues were generated in the project repository, and each
one of us handled some of the issues on a weekly basis via Pull Requests
(PRs). These were approved by members of the Open Science Labs team, who
were also on hand throughout the execution of the proposal.

Being a bit more specific about the follow-up, we had from an initial
meeting where we discussed the fundamental aspects of the project and
set up what was necessary to carry it out, to weekly meetings to present
our progress, to check if we had any obstacles or doubts that did not
allow us to move forward. Likewise, each PR was reviewed and if there
were any observations, we had feedback on this.

In summary, we can tell you that it was quite a dynamic workflow, where
a friendly space was built and allowed us to learn a lot.

![Flujo de trabajo](workflow.png)

> We would like to take this opportunity to thank [Ivan
> Ogasawara](https://github.com/xmnlab) and to [Ever
> Vino](https://github.com/EverVino), for their time and dedication.
> Both are active members of OSL and members of the steering council;
> they were there to support us and clarify our questions.

Here we tell you about our experience and the collaboration phase.

## How was our learning process?

SciCookie provided us, for the first time, with the opportunity to make
such a significant contribution to an open science and open source
project. It also allowed us to acquire new knowledge about some aspects
and technologies linked to the Python programming language, since at
that time, our knowledge was more oriented to the use of libraries,
objects, loops, among others.

About this learning process we can tell you that we did not know many
things and it was necessary to learn along the way, sometimes this was a
bit challenging but, in general, very profitable. Among the anecdotes
that we rescued is that, a couple of times, we "exploded" the code and
we didn't know why; the cause was that we didn't know the exact use of
single or double quotes, double braces, spaces or tabs within the
template. But then we were able to move forward and we even made
improvements in the workflow of the project.

Regarding the latter, we can certainly tell you that learning curves are
always steep. At the beginning you see everything uphill, but when you
are familiar with the technology and the tools, everything becomes
easier. Daring is always the first step.

On the other hand, if you are interested in collaborating on open source
projects, it is vital to have basic knowledge of Git and GitHub version
control tools, and to understand their essential commands such as git
pull, git push, git rebase, git log, git stash, among others. You may
also need knowledge of conda and poetry. We also learned a bit of jinja2
and make, and reviewed knowledge of function creation, conditional
evaluation, GitHub workflow, documentation aspects and some of the
technologies associated with it.

In summary, the experience of applying for and executing a PSF grant was
a valuable experience. We learned a lot about the process, how to
develop and maintain a Python tool, what structure a Python library or
package project should have, and how to build a community around an open
source project. We are also grateful for the support of the PSF, which
has allowed us to make a contribution to SciCookie. We feel satisfied
with the work we have done and are excited about the future of this
tool.

To all that we have told you, we add an invitation to collaborate on
open source or open science projects and, if you have already done so,
we encourage you to continue to do so. We were often motivated by seeing
our PRs being approved, we shared feelings of achievement and new
challenges and, most importantly, we were applying what open source
promotes: small collaborations make big changes and add to the projects,
achieving good and useful results.

After all this, you may wonder about the barriers to collaboration. We
dedicate the following lines to describe what we rescued from our
experience.

## Can you find barriers to collaboration?

The progress of your contributions depends on you. It is vital to ask
questions and not get bogged down by doubts. Often there is someone who
can show you that the problem you thought was big was simply a small
one, perhaps the code didn't work because it was single quotes instead
of double quotes, for example.

From the OSL community we can highlight that it focuses on creating
friendly, opportunity-filled spaces where you can share and acquire new
knowledge, eliminating barriers and discrimination. Perhaps you can find
these same characteristics in other open science and/or open source
projects.

That's why we want to invite you again to support and join the diverse
Python and open source community. It's an excellent experience and the
fact of contributing to something that can be useful to other people is
quite satisfying.

In general, collaborating on open source projects is a great way to
improve your programming skills, you also have the opportunity to work
with other developers and learn from them, get feedback on your work. If
you want to support or boost your project, the first thing to do is to
get started. Many communities are open to new contributions and
innovative ideas.

Leave us your comments if you want to know more about what we have told
you in this space :D

[1] **Additional note**: SciCookie originally went by the name of
cookiecutter-python and then renamed to osl-python-template.

<small size="0">Graphic elements of the cover were extracted from [Work
illustrations by Storyset](https://storyset.com/work), and then edited
to conform to the article.</small>
